The stock market’s late-September peak looks disturbingly like the beginning of a bear market.
That at least is the story being told by the U.S. market’s various sectors. Their relative returns during the third quarter of 2018 closely follow a pattern set prior to other bull market tops of the past 50 years.
At its late-November low, the S&P 500 SPX, -0.02%  was more than 10% below its all-time high of 2,390.75, where it closed on Sep. 30. If we rely on the semi-official definition of a bear market as a drop of at least 20%, the stock market at that point was already halfway there.
It’s not a new idea, of course, that market sectors perform in relatively predictable ways in the latter stages of a bull market. For this column, I relied on data from Ned Davis Research, the quantitative research firm. They calculated the average return of the S&P 500’s 10 sectors over the last three months of each prior bull market top (back to the early 1970s). This enables them to periodically look at how that historical ranking compares with how the sectors are actually performing.
An example can make this process clearer. According to Ned Davis Research, the health care sector was the second-best performer (on average) over the three months prior to past bull market tops. Ominously, it was also one of the best performers over the three months prior to the Sep. 30 market top — in first place, as a matter of fact.
At the bottom of the rankings, Utilities typically is the worst-performing sector during the last three months of past bull markets. Its ranking this time around: 8th out of 10.

To be sure, as you can see from the chart below, the correlation is not perfect. But it’s much closer than random. Notice that the sectors at the top of the ranking for past late-bull-market performance were also at the top in this year’s third quarter, just as those at the bottom before remained at the bottom. (Not included in the chart are the S&P 500’s recently created “Communications Services” sector and the recently terminated “Telecom Services” sector.)
One way of measuring the extent of correlation is a statistic known as the correlation coefficient, which would be 1.0 if there was a perfect one-to-one correspondence between the sectors’ historical ranking and their more recent one — and zero if there were no detectable correlation. The coefficient in the case of the rankings in the accompanying chart is 0.68. This translates into an r-squared of 0.47, which means that the historical ranking “predicts” or “explains” 47% of the third-quarter’s ranking.)
Why would the sector rankings shed any light on where we are on the market cycle? One reason is that the stock market may be anticipating an imminent economic slowdown, in the process favoring more defensive sectors such as Health Care and Consumer Staples. Another reason is that interest rates typically start rising in the latter stages of a bull market, and higher rates have a disproportionately negative impact on “Financials” and “Utilities.”
Needless to say, the sector rankings provide just one data point, and you should never rely on any one indicator — no matter how good its track record.
Ned Davis, for his part, looks at a myriad different indicators, and those indicators never speak with one voice. Though Davis is not outright bearish right now, it is noteworthy that he recently shifted his outlook from bullish to neutral with a “defensive” bias.

Investors have had to digest a lot in the past 12 months. While 2017 saw continued bull-market exuberance, the emotional trend of 2018 seems to be one of trepidation about more challenging times ahead.

The S&P 500 SPX, -0.02%   is in danger of logging its first negative year since 2008 (by my measure 2011 and 2015 are slightly positive based on Jan. 1 to Dec. 31). But even worse for many investors is that the tech sector, once a reliable profit center for outperformance and a favorite of many traders, has rolled over. Onetime tech darlings including Facebook Inc. FB, +0.36%  and Apple Inc. AAPL, +0.08%   have underperformed in a big way lately; iShares U.S. Technology ETF IYW, +0.07%  is down 13% since Oct. 1.

There are few signs that the tech sector sell-off is easing. Reports indicate that global smartphone sales have peaked and are steadily declining, acting as a headwind to all manner of related companies, and a general "risk-off" mentality has investors more reluctant than ever to chase overvalued small-caps operating in the red and relying heavily on narrative instead of tangible results.

To get ahead in 2019, you may want to consider a new strategy than simply chasing the FAANGs. Here are a few options if you're rebalancing your portfolio now:

Utilities
X
See Also
Why Is Brexit Proving to Be So Difficult?


Pause
Unmute
Current Time 0:00
/
Duration Time 0:00
Fullscreen

Sure, utilities are boring. They also are about as low risk as stocks can be.

U.S. utilities are effectively regional monopolies thanks to regulatory burdens and the incredibly costly proposition of anyone starting a new power company from the ground up. Moreover, utility stocks have not just held their own lately but have outperformed the market at large. Since Oct. 1, the Utilities Select SPDR Fund XLU, +0.87%   is up about 8%, vs. a 10% decline for the S&P 500 in the same period and an even sharper decline for Apple and Facebook shares.

Looking forward, there are reasons to expect this run for utilities to continue. After sluggish performance for much of 2018, valuations in the sector remain reasonably attractive, even after its fourth-quarter run. Plus, utility stocks are typically generous with dividends that help sweeten the pot for investors.

The XLU ETF is a good diversified way to tap into the space, but leading utility stocks NextEra Energy NEE, +0.49%   and Exeleon EXC, +0.13%   are both worth a look after returns of nearly 20% year-to-date in 2018.

Big Pharma

As a recent Barron's article observed, "The case for health care is simple. It is an all-weather sector that somehow manages to avoid almost all of the threats that are currently ravaging the broader stock market." Indeed, healthcare is not tied to cyclical economic trends, with patients spending on drugs and doctor's office visits regardless of inflation or the unemployment rate.

Yet not every segment of the sector is created equally. Smaller development stage biotech stocks can be incredibly volatile, and while that may mean rapid gains in a "risk-on" environment, it also means a race to the bottom when investors lose their nerve. Case in point: The SPDR S&P Biotech ETF XBI, -2.76%   is down about 17% since Oct. 1.

Contrast that with Big Pharma stocks. The largest drugmakers on the planet may not have high-octane potential, since new products basically just replace the decaying revenue from patent expirations, but they certainly have scale and stability.

As with utility stocks, profits are not elusive and dividends are not all Big Pharma has to offer. Merck & Co. MRK, +1.28%   and Pfizer Inc. PFE, +0.93%   both are up slightly since Oct. 1 despite a hostile investing environment, showing their ability to offer share appreciation as well as portfolio stability.

Consumer Discretionary

While there are hints of investor uncertainty, U.S. consumer confidence remains rock solid. So it would be a mistake to abandon consumer-focused stocks — particularly in specialty retail.

The Conference Board estimates that while there was a small rollback in November, consumer confidence is near an 18-year high. Mirroring that is spending data for October that was recently released by the Federal Reserve, showing continued strength in hard spending. And while a recent Gallup poll on holiday spending shows that some families have reduced their projected budget, the typical family expense will increase "modestly" this year and an actual year-over-year decline is "highly unlikely.”

From an investment perspective, these strong consumer metrics are most evident in a host of retail and consumer companies. First there's Victoria's Secret parent L Brands LB, -0.83%  , which had fallen on hard times but is up modestly this year so far, and showing signs of a turnaround even as the broader stock market has struggled. There's also Autozone, Inc. AZO, -0.66%   which has gained an impressive 13% since Oct.1 due to a massive earnings beat. TripAdvisor Inc. TRIP, -1.87%  has gained about 20% since Oct. 1 to maintain its status as one of S&P 500’s top performers to date in 2018.

With strong momentum lately, even as other stocks have faded, consumer names are worth a look in 2019 both as a profit center and as a way to take shelter from volatility in other sectors.

Gold

Speaking of places to take shelter, gold’s GCZ8, -0.14% safe-haven reputation of gold has returned. Both physical gold, as represented by exchange-traded funds such as SPDR Gold Trust GLD, -0.22%   or large-cap gold mining stocks tend to do better in times of trouble.

Case in point: GLD is up about 5% since Oct. 1 on rising gold prices, and miners AngloGold Ashanti AU, -0.17%   and Barrick Gold ABX, +0.64%  , for example, are each up about 20% in the same period.

Adding to gold's glitter right now are continued concerns of inflation. In fact, Goldman Sachs analysts just wrote, "At this stage of the business cycle, gold may be particularly appealing as a portfolio diversifier given that long-term bonds, traditional safe-haven assets, may be hurt if US inflation surprises to the upside." Since gold prices are denominated in U.S. dollars, prices of this commodity naturally rise as broader inflation pressure push up input costs across the board.

Having a diversified portfolio is always a good idea, and that's particularly true at times like now where market leadership is uncertain. While there are many strong growth metrics and reasons for optimism, it's naïve to ignore structural problems like inflation or Brexit or global trade wars. So whether you're looking to ride the recent momentum or simply put on a hedge, both physical gold and related equity plays are worth a look.

Marijuana

Some investors still think cannabis industry stocks are just speculative trades, while others have moral qualms about chasing companies associated with the drug. But marijuana investing is one of the hottest trends on Wall Street right now — and it would be a mistake to write this off simply as a fad.

After all, about two in three Americans favor weed’s legalization, and when you include medical marijuana laws the drug has already been decriminalized in some form in 33 U.S. states and the District of Columbia. As for the hard investment case, liquor giant Constellation Brands STZ, -2.20%   has increased its stake in marijuana company Canopy Growth CGC, -3.78%   with a $4 billion investment, and tobacco giant Altria MO, +1.11%   just announced that it was acquiring 45% of marijuana stock Cronos CRON, -4.53%  for $1.8 billion.

Admittedly, both Cronos and Canopy have been incredibly volatile. Yet it’s foolish to see these stocks simply as gambles instead of as legitimate investments. Particularly as growth is becoming incredibly hard to find in entrenched big tech stocks, and trade war tensions look to shut down multinational stocks, you could do worse than a pure domestic play on the emerging North American marijuana industry.

Ironically, the fact that the Volatility Index VIX, -3.77%  remains relatively subdued may suggest that the worst is yet to come. (More details here: S&P 500: Does low fear portend high risk?)

If that kind of volatility causes you an upset stomach, nausea, sweaty palms or portfolio shrinkage, it may be time to look at some low-volatility strategies.
X
See Also
Pelosi: Trump Doesn't Know 'What Is at Risk' in Government Shutdown


Pause
Unmute
Current Time 0:00
/
Duration Time 0:00
Fullscreen

Strategy No. 1: Outsource volatility management to ETFs

Exchange traded funds (ETFs) are a simple, low-cost option to reduce volatility.

There are a number of low-volatility ETFs, each using their own methodology. Beta, which is a measure of volatility relative to its benchmark, is an important number when shopping for a low-volatility ETF.

Beta readings above 1 mean more volatility than the corresponding benchmark; readings below that mean less volatility.

The iShares Edge MSCI Minimum Volatility USA ETF USMV, +0.18% the biggest low-volatility ETF, consists of a portfolio of U.S. large- and mid-cap stocks, and has a beta of 0.67%.

Other low-volatility ETFs focus on dividend yield (Legg Mason Low Volatility High Dividend ETF LVHD, +0.46% ), emerging markets (iShares MSCI Minimum Volatility Emerging Markets ETF EEMV, +0.29% ), or U.S. small-cap stocks (O’Shares FTSE US Small Cap Quality Dividend ETF OUSM, -1.04% ).

In general, low-volatility ETFs have reduced volatility. In the investment world, lower volatility usually means lower returns.

Strategy No. 2: Do-it-yourself volatility reduction

Low-volatility ETFs are built on a portfolio of low-volatility stocks and sectors. Nowadays it’s easy to screen stocks based on your individual parameters and build a portfolio accordingly.

Popular low-volatility stocks include Coca-Cola KO, +0.51% and Pfizer PFE, +0.93% Popular sectors include consumer staples XLP, +0.62% health care XLV, +0.10% and utilities XLU, +0.87%

Even a simple tweak, like substituting exposure to the Nasdaq COMP, -0.39%  or Russell 2000 RUT, -1.55%  with a broad market ETF like the Vanguard Total Stock Market ETF VTI, -0.24% or Dow Jones Industrial Average ETF DIA, +0.16% can reduce portfolio volatility.

Strategy No. 3: Common-sense timing

Regardless of the strategy, timing matters. Even the best ETF bought at the worst time will result in losses.

The chart below (published in the Oct. 28 Profit Radar Report) has been my personal S&P 500 roadmap. The premise has been simple: Reduce cash (or buy) around 2,600 points (horizontal green line) and accumulate cash (or sell) around 2,850 (red box). Equivalent levels for the S&P 500 SPDR ETF SPY, -0.15% are 260 and 283.
